LESSON 1: FROM A DESCRIPTION TO AI-GENERATED AUDIO

Goal: understand and control one short generation using our existing C++ host.

The path we are learning

    Your description -> trained music model -> stereo audio -> player or file

Training is how a model's parameters are learned from data. We are starting
with a model that has already been trained: Magenta RealTime 2 small.
Inference is running that model to generate new audio from a prompt.
Playback sends the generated samples to an audio device at the right speed.

Our project has two different sound sources:

  --source synth     Our C++ instruments and note patterns make the sound.
  --source magenta   A trained neural music model generates the sound.

The funk-study radio program currently uses synth. This lesson uses magenta.

Exercise A: one prompt, one short generation

Run this from the project directory in your terminal:

./build-ai/ai-music-cpu --source magenta --offline --duration 6 --no-input \
  --style "instrumental electronic funk, steady four-on-the-floor drums, gritty synth bass, a short repeating synth riff, 112 BPM" \
  --record recordings/lesson-01-a.wav

The switches mean:

  --source magenta    Use the trained audio model.
  --style            Describe the musical direction.
  --offline          Let generation finish at the model's own speed.
  --duration 6       Generate six seconds of audio.
  --no-input         Run this short experiment without terminal controls.
  --record           Save the generated audio for listening afterwards.

Offline generation opens no audio output. The saved file is an experiment,
not live radio. It contains newly generated model output if generation succeeds.
Output filenames must be new; the recorder protects existing files.

The CPU executable works without Metal GPU access. Expect several minutes for
this short exercise. If your terminal has GPU access, build-ai/ai-music can run
the same command using Metal. CPU build instructions are in README.md.

Once the command finishes, listen with:

afplay recordings/lesson-01-a.wav

Exercise B: change one thing

Run the same command with two edits:
  1. Replace "gritty synth bass" with "rounded synth bass".
  2. Change the output filename to recordings/lesson-01-b.wav.

Listen for the bass's texture and attack. Which output fits your idea better?
The current host does not expose a random seed, so these are exploratory
comparisons: the model can change other details too. A phrase in a prompt is
a request, not a guarantee of a particular instrument, exact tempo, or result.

Where the code connects

Open src/magenta_source.cpp and find:

  runner_.load_model(model.c_str(), false)
    Loads the already-trained model into the inference runtime.

  runner_.set_text_prompt(prompt)
    Sends your musical description for encoding and conditioning.

  runner_.start()
    Starts background generation.

  runner_.read_audio_stereo(left, right, frames, true)
    Retrieves generated stereo samples, waiting when needed in offline mode.

  src/audio.cpp and src/recorder.cpp
    Apply the host's processing/output gain and write the audio file.

Why continuous radio is a later step

Continuous playback needs new audio ready before the playback buffer empties.
An earlier local test generated 30 seconds of audio in 128.91 seconds. That
run worked offline but could not sustain live playback. A larger buffer alone
cannot fix a model that continually generates more slowly than playback.

Current verification, 2026-10-01

The Metal API reports zero accessible devices in the current agent process,
even though macOS lists the M1 GPU. The GPU executable now detects this before
MLX's device-array access. The cause of the missing GPU access remains outside
this repair.

The separate CPU backend generated six seconds of 48 kHz stereo neural audio
in 312.58 seconds, including startup. The recording has exactly 288,000 frames,
with no counted gaps, invalid samples, or recorder drops. Peak process memory
was about 3.6 GiB. Listen to the completed experiment:

afplay recordings/lesson-01-ai.wav

Its numerical import tests pass, including repeated calls with changed inputs
and weights. The existing audio-engine and score tests also pass. Evidence is
under validation/metal-fix/, especially final-generation.json. CPU generation
is working, but it cannot supply live radio at this speed. This test establishes
that the model runs; musical quality still needs your listening feedback.

Primary model documentation:
https://github.com/magenta/magenta-realtime/blob/main/docs/index.md

The next lesson can follow one generated audio block through the C++ host.
